here in South Africa it can also get
very hot but there's no danger of
flooding so termites can take refuge
from the heat below ground where it's
cool and relatively stable but two
million insects living below ground
create a different kind of problem the
air around them gets stale so termites
need to have a way of linking the
underground air with the fresh air above
a ventilation system and they do that
with this and to see how it works you've
got to look inside using the latest
scanning techniques we can create a
picture of the mounds interior an
intricate network of passages lead to a
central chimney hot stale air from the
insect population below rises up through
the chimney
but the top of the mound is sealed so
how does this stale air escape the mound
may look as though it has strong
defensive walls like a fortress but in
fact these walls are porous and their
primary purpose is to harness the wind
fresh air blowing against the side of
the mound is forced through the tiny
holes in these walls from there it
travels through the smaller tunnels
until it reaches the central chimney
here the cooler fresh air mixes with the
hot stale air rising from the insect
community below meanwhile some air is
blown around the side of the mound this
creates a suction that pulls the stale
air out of the chimney and outs of the
outer walls so an internal air current
is created and the whole mound
ventilated the mounds inhabitants spend
most of their time close to or below
ground level beneath their living
quarters
there are garden chambers where the
termites cultivate a fungus that rots
the wood and vegetation they collect and
make it digestible farther down still
the Queen lies in her own chamber a huge
body is a gigantic egg producing factory
she's so swollen that she can't look
after herself
the workers must constantly clean her
and feed her with food from their own
crops a partner with whom she founded
the colony maybe 20 years ago is still
with her and mates with her throughout
her life
she lays eggs and an extraordinary rate
as many as 30,000 a day as she produces
them so workers remove them from the
Royal chamber and take them to nurseries
there they'll be fed on compost from the
fungus gardens until they turn into
adults the super organism that lives in
this great castle crops the surrounding
vegetation just about as severely as an
antelope the density of individual
termites around here is extraordinary
over a hundred thousand per square meter
and just as there are Lance a leopard
the hunt antelope so in the undergrowth
there are insect hunters which prey on
the tiny herbivores the ants the
termites ancient enemy matter be Liam's
specialist termite hunter
a scout has laid down a clear chemical
trail and this battalion the workers
have picked it up and are following it
there may be only a few hundred of them
but they're going to severely test the
defenses of a termite colony
the mound has formidable guards soldier
termites
the ants have a special technique for
dealing with these soldiers they grab
the termites jaw and then sting it in
the only vulnerable place on its head in
its mouth
the amps frontline breaks into the
common reinforcements from the termite
soldiers arrived quickly already there
are casualties on both sides
but the invaders overwhelmed the
defenders
it's not to the ants advantage to kill
an entire termite colony any more than
it would be sensible for farmers to
exterminate their cattle better to let
most survive so that they can be
regularly raided so although there are
millions of termites in the colony the
matter belly ants rarely go deep into
the nest to press home their victory
the raid lasts less than 15 minutes
nonetheless the spoils are impressive
termite bodies are now being piled in
dumps outside the nest many of the
casualties are still alive but paralyzed
by the ant stings
now the Raiders have the considerable
task of carrying their victims back to
their nest